Default enarx trust process (#26)
enarx/rfcs: default-enarx-trust-process.md

- Tags: trust
- Addresses: (Issue #5)[https://github.com/enarx/rfcs/issues/5]

## Summary

Setting up trust domains and being able to transfer certain entities
between them in central to Enarx.  This RFC describes the default
trust process for Enarx and lays out sets of requirements for
implementations.

## Motivation

One of the key aims of the Enarx project is to allow clients to run
workloads on hosts which are "untrusted".  This RFC builds on previous
RFCs to describe the default model by which Enarx allows this to take
place, using the capabilities of TEEs, the underlying CPU(s) and
firmware of the host and other parties.

It should be noted that within the context of the Enarx project, trust
is always considered first and foremost from the perspective of the
workload owner - in this case, the tenant.  We should remember that
all trust relationships are explicitly uni-directional (though this
does not preclude a corresponding trust relationship in the other
direction).  In the case of Enarx, it is trust relationships from the
workload entity to other entities (primarily the host owner in this
document), and maintenance of the tenant's trust domain, which are

> always the priority. Any other benefits which may accrue to other

Reviewer: > In the case of Enarx, it is trust relationships from the
workload entity to other entities (primarily the host owner in this
document), and maintenance of the tenant's trust domain, which are
always the priority.

This sentence says some of the same things as the first sentence in this paragraph; could they be combined?

models being implemented, and how they reflect the "real world", in order
to allow designers, coders, documenters, testers, auditors and users of
the project to have as full an understanding of the process and
architecture as possible.

### How the trust domain change happens
The key state change in terms of the Enarx default trust model is from
state 1 to state 2.  It is at this point that at **TEE instance** on the
host (and in the **host owner's trust domain**), loaded with an **Enarx
runtime image** (which then executes, to become an **Enarx runtime
instance**) becomes an **Empty Keep**, within the **tenant trust domain**
(having moved out of the **host owner domain**. This is achieved by the
use of a __trust pivot__: the **host CPU + CPU firmware**.  The attestation
process described in the State 1->2 change section explicitly notes that
the cryptographic identity of the **host CPU + CPU firmware** must be
validated as part of the attestation measurement check process.

The ability for the tenant to trust the host CPU + CPU firmware underpins
the entire trust model process, and it is vital that all implementations
check it very carefully.

> ### State 0->1 change

Reviewer: Could be helpful to the human brain if each change had a name, ex: "TEE Creation and Enarx runtime loading"

#### State 0 - initial state

 - host owner trust domain
    - host
    - host CPU + CPU firmware
    - Enarx host agent
    - Enarx runtime image
    - other workloads
 - tenant trust domain
    - Orchestrator
    - Enarx client agent
    - tenant workload image
    - tenant workload image repository

#### State 1

 - host owner trust domain
    - host
    - host CPU + CPU firmware
    - Enarx host agent
    - **TEE instance**
    - **Enarx runtime instance (within TEE instance)**
    - other workloads
 - tenant trust domain
    - Orchestrator
    - Enarx client agent
    - tenant workload image
    - tenant workload image repository

#### Changes

The changes between state 0 and state 1 are the creation of a TEE instance
and the loading of the Enarx runtime image into that instance.

The initialisation of the process is prompted by the **Orchestrator**, which
communicates with the **Enarx client agent**, which contacts the **Enarx
host agent** over a network connection (which does not need to be
encrypted, as no confidential data is passed across it, as because the
**Enarx host agent** is not a trusted entity (part of the **tenant host

> domain** anyway).  A mechanism (such as a cryptographic nonce), allowing the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
host agent** over a network connection that does not need to be
encrypted, as no confidential data is passed across it since the
**Enarx host agent** part of the **tenant host
domain** and therefore not a trusted entity.  A mechanism (such as a cryptographic nonce), allowing the
```

Unbalanced parens!

 obtain the **tenant workload image**.
 
Though the encryption of the channel between the Enarx client agent
and the Enarx host agent is not **required**, the following properties are
considered to be **desirable**:

 - authentication of the Enarx client agent to the Enarx host agent
   - this allows the host to control which parties are permitted to create
   Enarx Keeps.  While this has no direct benefit to the tenant, an
   indirect benefit may be that the host can avoid DoS attacks, thereby
   maintaining availability for workload placement and execution.
   - note that the Enarx host agent is *not* trusted by the tenant, and
   it is therefore the responsibility of the host to decide whether to
   trust any such authentication.
 - integrity of the request
   - some DoS attacks or protocol attacks may be feasible, and mitigated
   by integrity protection.
 - encryption of the protocol handshake and further steps
   - some attacks based around protocol versioning or replays may be
   feasible, and can be avoided by encryption.

For the reasons noted above, encrypting the channel will sometimes be considered
the simplest option.

> ### State 1->2 change

Reviewer: Suggested state change title for humans: "Attestation resulting in a Keep"

CPU + CPU firmware**.  The measurement is then transmitted from the
**Enarx host agent** to the **Enarx client agent**.

The **Enarx client agent** checks the attestation measurement database
(TODO: defined in a separate RFC) to ensure that the attestation
measurement is correct.  This process includes checks for:

 - host CPU + CPU firmware validity
 - cryptographic correctness
 - TEE validity
 - valid Enarx runtime image.

If any of these checks fail, the state progression is stopped, and the
**Enarx client agent** logs an error and may send an error message to
the **Enarx host agent**.  The **Enarx client agent** also sends an
error message to the Orchestrator.

If the attestation measurement meets the checking criteria, the **Enarx
client agent** retrieves or derives the session key from the previous
communication originating in the **host CPU + CPU firmware** (the exact
mechanism being CPU architecture-dependent).  At this point, the state
transition is considered complete, and the TEE instance, loaded with
the Enarx runtime image, is now an **Empty Keep**, which includes a
running **Enarx runtime instance**. 

> ### State 2->3 change

Reviewer: "Provisioning"

#### State 2 - attested

 - host owner trust domain
    - host
    - host CPU + CPU firmware
    - Enarx host agent
    - Other workloads
 - tenant trust domain
    - Orchestrator
    - Enarx client agent
    - **Empty Keep**
    - tenant workload image
    - tenant workload image repository

#### State 3 - provisioned

 - host owner trust domain
    - host
    - host CPU + CPU firmware
    - Enarx host agent
    - other workloads
 - tenant trust domain
    - Orchestrator
    - Enarx client agent
    - **Provisioned Keep**
    - tenant workload image
    - tenant workload image repository

#### Changes

The change between state 2 and state 3 is the loading of the **tenant
Workload Image** into the **Empty Keep**, turning it into a **Provisioned
Keep**.

> During the state 0->1 change transition, the **Orchestrator** provided the

Reviewer: Once the transitions have names, the name should be referenced here.

    - Enarx host agent
    - **TEE instance**
    - **Enarx runtime instance (within TEE instance)**
    - other workloads
 - tenant trust domain
    - Orchestrator
    - Enarx client agent
    - tenant workload image
    - tenant workload image repository

#### Changes

The changes between state 0 and state 1 are the creation of a TEE instance
and the loading of the Enarx runtime image into that instance.

The initialisation of the process is prompted by the **Orchestrator**, which
communicates with the **Enarx client agent**, which contacts the **Enarx
host agent** over a network connection (which does not need to be
encrypted, as no confidential data is passed across it, as because the

> **Enarx host agent** is not a trusted entity (part of the **tenant host

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Enarx host agent** is not a trusted entity (as it is part of the **tenant host
```

Reviewer 3: These are a lot of `as` :smile:
